---
title: Floor Timbers
permalink: /floor-timbers/
shortUrl: 
tags: ariadne
comments: true
---

[![RNN]({{ tobylunt.github.io }}/assets/img/forward_floors_installed.jpg)]({{ tobylunt.github.io }}/floor-timbers/)

After getting Ariadne into her new home, we decided to first embark on
replacing a few of her floor timbers. The floor timbers are essential
structural members that tie the backbone to the rest of the boat.

<!--more-->

You can see how the floor timbers tie into the rest of the boat's
structure in the photo below, where I highlighted three of the floor
timbers with a red line. The floors vary in size, ranging from
approximately 2-3' in width and a depth of up to 8" or so down in the
bilge. The floors tie the keel timber to the frames, and to the
planking and the skin of the boat. These are essential structural
members and are often considered to be primary points of failure for
lightly built wooden boats. 

![Ariadne]({{ tobylunt.github.io }}/assets/img/floors_companionway.jpg "Companionway floor timbers")

Some of the beefier floor timbers on Ariadne have been replaced (out
of teak!) while many of the originals fore and aft are suffering from
severe nail sickness due to the original iron bolts corroding and
delignifying the wood. We began by replacing seven forward floor
timbers out of laminated white oak, and replacing the bolts with
silicon bronze.

![Ariadne]({{ tobylunt.github.io }}/assets/img/rusted_iron_bolt.jpg "Rusted iron bolt")

The floor timbers were patterned and laminated up to a rough size far
from the boat. This way, we could simply spile the final shape onto
the mocked up piece and cut the correct bevels on the bandsaw. In
addition to the thicker laminate stack, we screwed a thinner stack of
laminates across the top of each floor timber to reduce grain run-out
and increase strength. We were inspired by the "floor timbers with
wings" concept from Bud Macintosh's excellent "How to Build a Wooden
Boat."

![Ariadne]({{ tobylunt.github.io }}/assets/img/floor_timbers_sanding.jpg "Floors lammed up")

![Ariadne]({{ tobylunt.github.io }}/assets/img/floor_timbers_screwing.jpg "Floor timber top lamination")

The new floors were primed and installed, temporarily bolting through
the forefoot as the forefoot itself will be replaced next.

![Ariadne]({{ tobylunt.github.io }}/assets/img/forward_floors_installed.jpg "Forward floors installed")
