---
title: Floor Timbers
description: "In which we Ariadne's restoration begins. An initial group of bad floor timbers are replaced."
publishDate: "24 July 2018"
tags: ["ariadne"]
---

![Floors](@/assets/img/forward_floors_installed.jpg)

After getting Ariadne into her new home, we decided to first embark on
replacing a few of her floor timbers. The floor timbers are essential
structural members that tie the backbone to the rest of the boat.

You can see how the floor timbers tie into the rest of the boat's
structure in the photo above, where the new floors are primed in
orange and installed. The photo below shows the interior of the hull
through the companionway, where I highlighted three larger floor
timbers with a red line. The floors vary in size, ranging from
approximately 2-3' in width and a depth of up to 8" or so down in the
bilge. The floors tie the keel timber to the frames, and to the
planking and the skin of the boat. These are essential pieces and can
be primary points of failure for lightly built wooden boats.

![Ariadne](@/assets/img/floors_companionway.jpg "Companionway floor timbers")

Some of the beefier floor timbers on Ariadne have been replaced (out
of teak!) while many of them fore and aft are suffering from severe
nail sickness due to the original iron bolts corroding and
delignifying the wood. We began by replacing seven forward floor
timbers out of laminated white oak, and will replace the iron bolts
with new ones manufactured from silicon bronze.

![Ariadne](@/assets/img/rusted_iron_bolt.jpg "Rusted iron bolt")

The floor timbers were patterned and laminated up to their rough shape
far away from the boat. This way, when we got back to Maine, we could
simply spile the final shape onto the mocked up piece and cut the
correct bevels on the bandsaw. In addition to the thicker laminate
stack, we screwed a thinner stack of laminates across the top of each
floor timber to reduce grain run-out and increase strength. We were
inspired by the "floor timbers with wings" concept from Bud
Macintosh's excellent "How to Build a Wooden Boat."

![Ariadne](@/assets/img/floor_timbers_sanding.jpg "Floors lammed up")

![Ariadne](@/assets/img/floor_timbers_screwing.jpg "Floor timber top lamination")

The new floors were primed and installed, temporarily bolting through
the forefoot as the forefoot itself will be replaced next. We will
paint over the red lead primer to minimize the halloween effect down
in the interior. Another seven to nine floors aft of the cockpit will
also need to be replaced.

![Ariadne](@/assets/img/forward_floors_installed.jpg "Forward floors installed")
